[ Silence ]
[ Music ]
>> Lisa Garr: Hi, I'm Lisa Garr,
host of Gaiam Inspirations.
So what does it mean to
be an environmentalist?
The film "A Fierce Green
Fire," directed and written
by my guest today, Mark
Kitchell, answers that question
by documenting the largest
movement of the 20th Century,
the environmental movement.
"A Fierce Green Fire" brings
together all of the major parts
of environmentalism
and connects them.
It focuses on activism, people
fighting to save their homes,
their lives, and the future.
And it succeeds against
all odds.
Let's take a look at the
film, "A Fierce Green Fire."
>> Lois Gibbs: I carried
a child for nine months.
Our little Julie was stillborn.
The loss of our child may be a
direct result to the chemicals.
Please don't allow
this to happen
to anyone else before
you get them out.
>> While our sewerage was going
right down the Hudson River,
air pollution was
growing just as fast
as new automobiles
were coming out.
>> The dams in the Grand
Canyon that was going
to be a fight to the death.
>> They were going
to take the water
out of the river; all of it.
>> To these people
apparently the balance
of nature was something
that was repealed as soon
as man came on the scene.
>> If we do not save the
environment, then whatever we do
in civil rights will
be of no meaning,
because then we will have
the equality of extinction.
>> All of a sudden people
said, "Wait a second,
this is not how we
have to live."
>> If I was elected to
[inaudible] out this door,
does anybody know what
would happen to her?
[Crowd Cheers]
>> Where is environmental
extremism?
I don't think they'll be happy
until the White House
looks like a bird's nest.
>> The protesters were told
not to block the trucks.
They are now lying in the
streets now blocking one truck.
>> It wasn't just a matter
of holding up signs saying,
"Stop killing the whales."
No; Green Peace wanted
to get out there in front
of the whaling boats
and stop them.
>> They were reinventing
civilization
and did not know how.
I didn't either, but I
figured we might find out.
>> How do you hold
forest [inaudible]
when every other force
around you is trying
to get you to privatize?
>> We are going to shed
blood because of our land.
We will. Our forefathers
shed blood for our lands.
>> Americans understood
what was going on,
and what the potential was,
but still nothing happening
in Washington; not
a damned thing.
>> Global warming is
the greatest single hoax
ever perpetrated.
>> I don't know, do we have to
have a hurricane take out Miami
and Shanghai to have
everybody wake up?
It can happen next year.
It might be possible
to still do that.
What a hell of a
way to run a planet.
[ Music ]
[ Silence ]
>> LG: Welcome, welcome to
the show, Mark Kitchell.
Thank you for being here.
>> Mark Kitchell: My pleasure.
>> LG: What an incredible film.
I love all of the
history that I learned
about this film was amazing.
What inspired you to make
such an immense documentary?
>> Mark Kitchell: Well,
there's probably 4 things;
it was my wife's idea.
>> LG: Okay.
>> Mark Kitchell: And then it
happened on the freeway going
from LA up to San Francisco,
and we started riffing
on all the cool important
great stories.
I think it's a film
that had to be made,
and if not by me somebody else.
There needs to be the
big picture exploration
of the environmental movement.
And then, you know, this
is sort of what I do.
Berkeley in the '60s
was a sort of history
of a social movement composed
of interviews and archival,
and really trying to
get at the meaning of it
in a bigger historical
sense and get
at the meaning and
where it's going.
And when we were trying
to do all those things,
there needed to be that film.
>> LG: Do you have a
certain affinity with history
or with the environmental
movement specifically?
>> Mark Kitchell: Well,
both; but this does seem
to be the kind of film I end
up making for whatever reason.
>> LG: Yes.
>> Mark Kitchell: And
I do love history.
And I was -- you know, I
had a déjà vu experience,
like I can't believe
that somebody hasn't
made this film already.
>> LG: Right, right.
>> Mark Kitchell: And that
happened on Berkeley in the '60s
and it happened again
on this, and, you know,
there are so many
filmmakers these days,
how did this one slip
through the cracks?
>> LG: And I've seen so many
films on environmentalism
and on the problems, and
the lack of solutions,
but I haven't seen -- this
film built the case for me.
It was very, very
important to see.
And this title, "A Fierce Green
Fire," what does that mean?
>> Mark Kitchell: Well, we were
trying to find a good title.
We had been calling it "The
Environmental History Project."
But it's a famous
story in the movement,
one of the pioneering
figures, Aldo Leopold
in the 1910s was a
young forest ranger
in a young national forest
that had just come into being.
And his job, among other
things, was to kill predators.
And so they were riding
the range in Arizona,
and they saw a wolf down in the
ravine and instinctually pulled
out his rifle and shot it.
And the cubs scattered
and they went down to see,
and in the dying she wolf's
eyes he saw fierce green fire.
And that was his awakening.
Forgive me, I [inaudible].
>> LG: Yes, I know.
It is so impactful.
Let's take a look at this moment
and how you captured
this in the film.
It's beautiful.
Let's take a look.
>> For a young forest
ranger named Aldo Leopold,
the awakening was seeing a
fierce green fire in the eyes
of a wolf he had just shot.
>> The fierce green fire he saw
in her eyes was a real
turning point for him,
in terms of understanding
that life has a part, a piece.
And he had a personal
realization of what it means
to tear away, to take away
a part of the realm of life.
And so if you look
at the manifestation
of environmentalism in the
world, it's because people one
by one by one have
had that experience.
[ Music ]
>> LG: You know, Mark got
choked up during the break here,
and I understand that.
That's who you are.
That's why you write
these documentaries.
I explained this because I have
my daughter watch it with me,
and she was -- she asked
why the wolf had to die,
and I was trying to
explain that wolf,
because you were
able to document it.
She lost her life so that
so many other wolves
could be saved,
and so many other
forests could be saved,
and so many huntsmen
could stock.
And it was very, very important.
So, again, thank you for this.
>> Mark Kitchell: Sure, sure.
>> LG: So let's get back
to the message of the film.
What did you hope to
permeate with your message?
What did you want to
send with this film?
>> Mark Kitchell: Well,
I was mostly trying
to put together all the pieces
of this biggest movement
the world has ever seen,
and yet it so atomized
and episodic.
It doesn't really have
a sense of itself.
And so I was trying
to put it altogether
and give it some
deeper sense of meaning.
And I was aiming specifically at
our kids, more than us who lived
through it, the rising
environmentalism.
>> LG: Yes.
>> Mark Kitchell: And it's
been very effective that way.
But there are specific themes
and meanings within the film,
certainly one of the main themes
going on is bottom up movements
versus top-down politics.
>> LG: Yes, yes; yes.
>> Mark Kitchell: And
the need for both and --
>> LG: Well, also that
it started, you know,
when it started in the '70s --
and you document
when the EPA formed,
and 20 million people showed
up for the first Earth
Day march in 1970.
This might be a fact that many
people know, but I didn't.
And this has been going on
every single year since then.
>> Mark Kitchell: Not
always 20 million.
>> LG: No; not always
20 billion.
Why did it -- why do you
think it has decreased?
>> Mark Kitchell: Well, there's
fatigue, and it's hard to hold
onto these issues as important,
the central issues
of the society.
The weight that the
environmental movement,
environmental issues have
in society has often been,
you know, subjugated to things
like wars, or civil rights,
or anti-nuclear, more
pressing movements.
It's so intangible
this movement,
especially as it's grown
from saving your local swamp
to the world's climate.
People just -- I think people
get weary of it, you know.
There's such a thing as
eco bummer, you know.
>> LG: Eco bummer?
>> Mark Kitchell:
Yes, yes, yes; it's --
we're always the
people who are --
>> LG: Oh, yes, yes, yes, yes.
>> Mark Kitchell: -- you can't
drive so fast and you can't --
>> LG: Right; and we take away
your modern conveniences, yes.
>> Mark Kitchell: Yes, right.
>> LG: However, you
chose to make this film
in a historical way
for a reason.
Do you think that the
history that you've documented
in this film will make the
impact you want to make?
>> Mark Kitchell: Well, let me
come at that from what we did
that was different
from other films
on the subject matter is we
chose to focus on the movements,
and on the activism more
than the issues per se.
And that meant a
much more impassioned
and a much more engaging
for the audiences.
You can see people
like Lois Gibbs --
>> LG: Yes.
>> Mark Kitchell: -- fighting
really to save their lives,
and their children,
and their homes.
And I think audiences
can identify
and follow that much better.
And film's a very
emotional medium.
>> LG: Yes.
>> Mark Kitchell:
And often the problem
with environmental films is
that they're not
emotional enough or that --
>> LG: Right; they're
just documenting.
>> Mark Kitchell: -- you know,
you're peeling back the layers
of this issue and at the
end you say, "You know,
hope is a renewable resource.
Go out and change
your light bulbs."
And it just felt --
>> LG: Yes.
>> Mark Kitchell:
-- insufficient.
So this is -- we thought
that this would be much more
involving, and in fact it is.
>> LG: So why did you
choose to break the film
down into 5 different acts?
>> Mark Kitchell: Yes.
Well, the basic idea came
from one of our advisors,
E.O. Wilson, who's a very
imminent conservation biologist
at Harvard, the ant man.
And he said we should focus
on 5 of the most dramatic
and important events and
people, and try and put
that into something much shorter
and more pity and dramatic.
And we were working on a much
longer film at that point.
And I realized he was right, and
right there in the Bug Museum
at Harvard we picked
those 5 main stories
which are in the film.
And then I took that idea --
I had to set it aside for a
few years and work for a living
and raise a family, but
when I came back to it,
I really built those 5 main
stories out into an act.
I realized that each one was
emblematic of a movement,
a part of the movement and
an era of the movement.
And so I eventually came up with
sort of an hourglass structure
in which you start wide with
the origins of pollution,
or alternative ecology
movements,
or international
resource issues.
And then I narrow in
on the main story,
and then after that we open
up to explore ramifications,
evolution of that
part of the movement.
And it seemed to work
well and it seems
that this film can use
a lot of structure,
they can use a guiding
hand from a narrator.
You're going through a lot
of story and a lot of stuff,
and you need -- I think it helps
to have some real structure.
>> LG: Yes, structure to it.
>> Mark Kitchell: Yes.
>> LG: Let's take a
look at the first act;
and this pretty much explains
the beginning of the Sierra Club
and a couple of environmental
movements
that we still have today.
Take a look.
>> Saving the land,
nature wild and pure,
was the main thrust
of conservation.
And the pivotal battles
were over dams.
The first was Hetch
Hetchy Valley
in Yosemite National Park.
San Francisco proposed
to build a reservoir.
It turned into the
defining struggle
of the conversation movement,
a clash of 2 pioneers.
John Muir, preservationist
wanted
to preserve nature understanding
that the flow of wildness came
from the very beginning
of life, that we're part
of this great scheme
of wilderness,
and we should preserve
it for its sake
and also for our own sake.
Well, the other side of this
argument was a fellow named
Gifford Pinchot, who
has made the first hit
of the forest service.
Pinchot's philosophy was that
conservation meant the wise use
of resources for
the greatest number
of people for the longest time.
And then if you had
two Yosemite's,
it was okay to use one
of them for water supply.
>> Muir railed against what he
called "the temple destroyers,"
and fought on for 12 long years.
>> LG: Mark, there always
seems to be this debate
between what's going on with
progress and what's going
on with the needs
of the environment.
And we've been in this
debate for a long time.
Why do you feel -- or how
do you feel that we can move
through that, or meet both
somewhere in the middle?
>> Mark Kitchell: [Laughs]
Well, you're right,
back in the '70s I recall it
was jobs versus the environment,
and there's always
been that tension
between this thing we call
"progress," and this movement
which is about trying to halt
the destruction that comes
as a byproduct of all
that modern industrial
society and all its progress.
And --
>> LG: Right; and
all the conveniences
of it and so forth, yes.
>> Mark Kitchell: And, you
know, it goes to the heart
of what this civilization is
about in this time of, you know,
we've really mastered the
material world and turned it
to our benefit, and we dominate
this world so completely.
>> LG: Yes.
>> Mark Kitchell: You know,
we're only now getting
around to the deeper
consequences of that
and starting to wake up to that.
And so there's always going to
be that tension, and, you know,
you can notice how the
environmental movement has
preceded from trying to
save a valley in Yosemite
or somebody's backyard,
into big pollution issues
and then bigger issues of
trying to reinvent the society
in the way that we make them
do everything, and then getting
to global scale resources
using crises and finally
and the biggest of them all.
>> LG: Well, what about the
whole water wars and all
of those, you know, where
there's the need to,
as you explained in the film,
bring these veins of water
down to supply water to
highly-populated areas?
>> Mark Kitchell: It was crazy,
they were going to take water
of the Yukon River and
bring it to California.
>> LG: So that got stopped?
>> Mark Kitchell: Oh, yes.
There's a lot of crazy
stuff that got stopped,
especially in California,
you know.
>> LG: Yes.
So --
>> Mark Kitchell: Thank
God for these people.
>> LG: -- we did -- yes, a
lot of progress has been made,
and that's one of the things I
like about this film is you
show the success stories.
>> Mark Kitchell: Yes.
>> LG: But this one
didn't start off so well.
"Up To" is about pollution,
and I had not heard
of this story before
about the canal.
This is a very important
part of the film.
Why did you choose to
highlight this story?
>> Mark Kitchell:
Well, it was a natural.
It was -- it's the
strongest story in the film.
Lois Gibbs is our
out and out heroine.
>> LG: She is.
>> Mark Kitchell: You know,
she was an angry housewife
who had sick children
and decided she was going
to do something about it.
And she spent the last 35
years fighting these battles,
not just for her, but
for all the other Lois's,
so she's a real hero.
>> LG: She is.
Let's take a look at her.
Take a look.
>> Lois Gibbs: I carried
a child for 9 months.
Our little Julie was stillborn.
[ Background Sounds ]
The loss of our child may be a
direct result to the chemicals.
Please don't allow
this to happen
to anyone else before
you get them out.
Don't let it happen
to yourselves.
[ Music ]
>> Pollutants and toxic
chemicals grew out of a bright
and shiny vision
of civilization.
It was an age of miracles,
the rise of modern chemistry
brought new synthetic wonders.
But it had a dark side.
DDT had saved millions in
the fight against malaria,
however it proved
lethal to wildlife.
The first to sound the
alarm was Rachel Carson,
whose book "Silence Spring"
set off widespread concern
and controversy.
>> Miss Carson maintains
that the balance
of nature is a major force
in the survival of man;
whereas the modern chemist,
the modern scientist believes
that man is steadily
controlling nature.
>> Now, to these people
apparently the balance
of nature was something
that was repealed as soon
as man came on the scene.
>> People were finding from
Rachel Carson and others
about DDT and other poisons that
were getting into their food.
The chemical industry
was unregulated.
Raw sewerage was going
right down the Hudson River.
Air pollution was
growing just as fast
as new automobiles
were coming out.
You had steel mills belching
out whatever it was
they belched out,
and all of a sudden people
said, "Wait a second,
this is not how we
have to live."
>> Why can't we get any
decent drinking water
in this town anymore?
>> If you visit American city,
you will find it very pretty.
Just 2 things of which you must
beware, don't drink the water
and don't breathe the air.
>> Hey, you kids, don't you know
better than to swim in there?
That water's polluted.
Son, come on out of their
before you get sick.
>> Pollution, pollution, we've
got smog and sewerage and mud.
Turn on your tap and get
hot and cold running crud.
>> The great question of the
'70s is, "Shall we surrender
to our surroundings, or shall
we make our peace with nature
and begin to make reparations
for the damage we have done
to our air, to our
land, and to our water?"
>> Earth Day created a tide
so strong that it swept
up both Republicans
and Democrats.
It launched the second
wage of environmentalism.
Marked by a series of landmark
environmental protection laws,
the creation of the
EPA, strengthening
of the Clean Air Act,
expanding the Clean Water Act,
passing the Endangered Species
Act, and creating Super Fund
to control toxic waste.
Cleaning up the environment came
down to issuing regulations
and enforcing them.
>> LG: So how did
you get this footage?
This is classic footage.
Where did you get all this from?
>> Mark Kitchell: Well, we
had more time than money
at the beginning, and with
a bunch of interns I talked
to the 3 big distributors
of environmental docs
and got total access to their
collections, their catalogs,
and we spent a summer and more
looking through every film.
>> LG: Wow.
>> Mark Kitchell: Saw a lot
of stumps; but and we went
on from there and, you know --
>> LG: Wow.
>> Mark Kitchell: -- in the age
of the internet it's really
our friend doing this kind
of work because, you know,
we were able to find so much.
Often I would look at film
festivals and look at the roster
of films, and then
track them down.
You know, at a certain
point all of us go
to the National Archives, and a
lot of what you just saw comes
from the National Archives.
>> LG: So this has been
available to us all along,
but it hasn't been
highlighted in this way.
>> Mark Kitchell: Yes.
>> LG: Now, tell me
about the narrators
that you got on the film.
That was Ashley Judd we
were just hearing from.
Earlier it was Robert Redford.
>> Mark Kitchell: Yes, yes.
>> LG: Later we'll
hear from Meryl Streep.
How did you get these people
involved in this documentary?
>> Mark Kitchell: Well, mostly
they responded to the film.
And I think it's a
testament to their good taste
and their commitment to
the cause that they did.
I mean, Robert Redford
normally got into Sundance.
That was the door that opened.
And Ashley Judd was recommended
by a Mocky Mock [phonetic]
at the Sierra Club, one of their
national organizers who comes
from Kentucky, and knows of her
work in [inaudible] minings.
And Meryl Streep, you know,
we tried everything we could
and finally did a straight
ask CAA, asked her agent.
And within 10 days we got
a yes, which was just --
>> LG: Amazing.
>> Mark Kitchell: -- phenomenal.
>> LG: Well, that
was great though.
Do they have a personal
connection
to any of these stories?
>> Mark Kitchell: I think so.
I mean, Ashley told me about
growing up with the Love Canal
as kind of the background,
and, you know,
a lot of us did not
know that story.
>> LG: Right.
>> Mark Kitchell: I didn't.
>> LG: No; it's the
modern-day --
I mean, it's not the modern-day,
it's the Erin Brockovich
all over again.
>> Mark Kitchell: Yes.
>> LG: Let's take a look
at another clip here showing
the story of Love Canal.
It's worth looking at.
[ Music ]
>> The issue of toxic
waste began bubbling
up at a place called
"Love Canal."
It was neither the first nor
the worst toxic waste dump.
What made the difference
was the people
of Love Canal, led
by Lois Gibbs.
>> You are murderers.
Each and every one of you
in this room are murderers.
[ Chanting ]
>> When Love Canal came it was
a new segment in the movement.
It wasn't that we don't
care about the forest,
it was the people focus that set
us aside from the other elements
that had come before
us, and really the focus
on if the fish are dying,
and if the birds are dying,
then we're going to die.
>> Buried beneath the
neighborhood were 20,000 tons
of poisonous chemicals,
dumped in an old canal
by Hooker Chemical Corporation.
Reports of trouble
began in 1976,
but Love Canal did not
explode until Michael Brown,
a journalist at the Niagara
Gazette wrote articles exposing
the problem.
They caught the eye
of Lois Gibbs.
>> Lois Gibbs: I read
a newspaper article,
and Love Canal had 20,000 tons
of chemicals buried in it,
and that it was leaking
into the neighborhood.
And so I read this newspaper and
I said, "Oh, those poor people."
The next day there was
another article and in
that one it talked about the
99th Street Elementary School,
and I was like, "Oh my goodness,
that's where Michael's
going to kindergarten.
That's why Michael's so sick."
>> Lois tried to get her son
transferred to another school,
but the superintendent refused.
>> Lois Gibbs: And when I
met with Dr. Long he said,
"I am not about to
move 407 children
because of one irate hysterical
housewife with a sickly kid."
>> Instead Lois began
to circulate a petition
to close the school.
She went door to door
discovering the extent
of the damage.
>> Lois Gibbs: I was shocked.
I was absolutely shocked.
I thought I was the only
one with a sickly child.
family that was affected
by these leaking
chemicals from Love Canal.
In their basement you could see
where the chemical
residue just comes
up through the basement floor
and just pools there,
and it smells.
It smells like a
chemical factory.
It's nasty.
>> This wall just popped up
and this is what we
feel is causing a lot
of the birth defects
and the miscarriages
and health problems in the area.
>> LG: 56% of the children were
born with severe birth defects
in Love Canal; I
mean, malformations
in their face, hands, legs.
I mean, how did the
government justify that,
because I remember there
was a trial, right?
Well, I saw it in
the documentary.
>> Mark Kitchell:
Well, that first came
out when they did
their own health study.
And as Lois tells it, the New
York State government, you know,
they threw the report on
the floor and stomped on it,
and said it's useless
housewife data.
And then they went and
did their own study.
And they came up with
exactly the same results.
>> LG: Results; wow.
>> Mark Kitchell: And then they
said, "But we don't believe
that that's a result of the
chemicals of Love Canal.
We believe that it's
a random cluster
of genetically defective
people."
>> LG: People; in an area.
>> Mark Kitchell: Yes.
>> LG: Unrelated.
>> Mark Kitchell: So they
blamed it on the people
and on random -- and there was
obvious self-interest there
because if they dealt
with it there
at Love Canal there were
56 other places in New York
that they had to deal
with; and so any excuse.
>> LG: So what wound
up happening?
Why do you call her
"the heroine?"
>> Mark Kitchell: Well,
she just pursued it
for 2 years in everything --
>> LG: Relentlessly.
>> Mark Kitchell: "Relentless,"
there's the word for it.
And they forced the federal
government, the EPA, to come in.
They forced the state of New
York to deal with the issue.
They forced it, forced it,
forced it until finally
the EPA did a study
that showed chromosome damage.
And when it got to
that level, you know,
the EPA recommended getting
everybody out of there.
And Carter overruled them.
President Carter
overruled the EPA.
But then what they did was they
took the EPA officials hostage
and they forced Jimmy Carter to
basically deal with the problem.
And 2 days later he cried uncle.
>> LG: Lois Gibbs did this,
she took them hostage.
Now, this could not
work in today's times.
The petition is -- it's
fairly effective anymore
because we used to see
these people go door to door
into a government
that would listen.
>> Mark Kitchell: Yes.
>> LG: It's not so much
the same these days.
>> Mark Kitchell: I
don't agree, Lisa.
>> LG: Oh, good; good.
Tell me why.
>> Mark Kitchell: Well, my
wife is one of the leaders
of Occupy in San Francisco.
I'm around lots of movements.
I'm seeing what Bill
McKibben is doing with 350.
There's been in the last couple
years a real upsurge in activism
around these issues, and it's
taken 25 years to finally take
on climate as an issue at the
grassroots at a movement level.
And I see a lot of
people pushing on it.
And it's probably the hardest
issue to take on at that level
that there's ever been.
But people are finding
a way to do it,
and it's because we have to.
>> LG: Well, what are some
of the effective ways,
because I know I'm not
the only person that feels
that it is a challenge.
>> Mark Kitchell: Yes.
Well, you can see
over the course
of 350.org the McKibben family.
You know, McKibben wrote
the first copyright article
in '88 about this.
And he waited around
and nobody did anything.
And he waited around some
more and nobody did anything.
And he finally just got
fed up, and with 6 students
from his class at Middlebury
College they put together --
it was first called
"Step It Up."
And it happened locally in
Vermont, and then they decided
to go national with it.
And they -- you know, the time
was right after all those years
of Bush, Junior, they -- people
really needed to step it up.
And it caught on like
wildfire, and they --
>> LG: And the --
>> Mark Kitchell: -- you
know, they would do sit-ins
on the courthouse steps, and
they would do photographs,
and they would do photographs
all over the world, in every --
all over the world people wanted
to be involved and do something,
and they sort of built on that.
And you know --
>> LG: What did 350.org,
what does it stand for?
>> Mark Kitchell: Well, it
refers to the parts per million
of carbon dioxide that is
considered the safe level,
and anything beyond 350,
which we're 25 years
beyond 35 parts per million,
we're now at 400
and climbing fast.
And we may hit 800 before
this thing gets dealt with.
You know, we may triple the
amount of carbon dioxide
in the atmosphere before
we can finally get the --
>> LG: Attention.
>> Mark Kitchell: -- social and
political wheel to deal with it.
You know, we're going to lead
the world in on this one.
>> LG: Well, this is how
these particular movements
are started.
And we'll take a look here
now at this next clip.
And this is how Green
Peace was started.
Take a look.
>> We're coming upon a
floating slaughterhouse.
There's blood in the
water, there's huge slabs
of blubber being hauled up
on these big factory ships.
Blood is just pouring
out of this pipe,
and the stench alone made
us all want to throw up.
[ Music ]
>> Suddenly Bob and I were
in a small boat in front
of a Soviet harpoon vessel
that was bearing down on us.
In front of us is 8
magnificent sperm whales
that were fleeing
for their life.
And every time the
harpooner tried to get a shot,
I was at the helm so I would
maneuver the boat to try
and block the harpoon.
>> Here's the whales,
here's us in our zodiacs,
and here's the Russian ship.
We are right between the
Soviet ship and the whales.
And the harpooner's
not shooting,
but eventually somebody from the
bridge walks down the catwalk
and talks to the harpooner,
and the harpooner nods
and the guy goes back.
And Bob looks in his eyes and
he knows, this guy is going
to shoot this harpoon.
>> And he looked at us and
smiled and brought his finger
across his neck, and that's when
I realized Gandhi wasn't going
to pull through for us that day.
>> And at that very moment,
they fire the harpoon.
[ Music ]
>> And this harpoon flew
over our head and slammed
into the backside of one of
the whales, and she screamed.
[ Music ]
It was a very humanlike
scream, like a woman,
and it took us completely
off-guard.
>> The whalers purposely
shoot at a female first,
because they know that the
bull whales will attack them.
And then when the bull
whales come to attack them,
which is exactly what happened,
he was waiting for them
and very nonchalantly
pulled the trigger
and sent a second harpoon
into the head of the whale,
and he screamed and fell
back, and now the water's full
of blood everywhere,
from the 2 dying whales.
And as the whale lay and
roll in agony on the surface
of the ocean, I caught his eye
and he looked straight at me.
[ Music ]
>> And we're looking into the
eye of this huge sperm whale,
and I have to tell you, it's
sort of beyond emotional.
You know when you -- there
are certain moments that are
so emotional you're just
in brand new territory.
>> Why were the Russians
killing these whales?
You know, they didn't
eat sperm whale meat,
but they did use a
spermaceti oil [phonetic]
to make high heat-resistant
lubricating oil for machinery.
And one of the pieces of
machinery that they used it
in is the manufacturer
of Intercontinental
Ballistic Missiles.
And I said, "Here we are
destroying this incredibly
beautiful intelligent socially
complex creature for the purpose
of making a weapon meant for the
mass destruction of humanity."
And that's when it came
to me with a, you know,
like a flash that we're insane.
We're just totally insane.
And from that moment on I
decided that I work for whales,
I work for seals, I work for sea
turtles and fish, and seabirds.
I don't work for people.
>> LG: See, I am so grateful
that you did these interviews
and found this footage, because
that was an example of success,
of a victory, because
eventually all
of those ships got
stopped, didn't they?
>> Mark Kitchell: Yes.
>> LG: Yes; that's amazing.
>> Mark Kitchell: Except
the Japanese doing their
scientific whaling.
>> LG: Yes.
>> Mark Kitchell: And
he's still fighting them.
>> LG: He's still fighting.
>> Mark Kitchell: With
more success every year.
>> LG: We were facing extinction
of these incredibly magnificent
animals, and for someone to go
out and singlehandedly
start a movement
that stopped every
Russian ship in --
and whaling altogether
in that particular period
of history is enormous.
>> Mark Kitchell: Yes.
>> LG: And motivating.
>> Mark Kitchell: Yes; not only
the Russians, the Icelandic,
the Spanish, the Norwegian
fleets calls formidable.
>> LG: Yes.
Well, it takes somebody
like that.
So eventually something
wound up happening to him
where he was no longer a part
of the Green Peace
Movement though, right?
>> Mark Kitchell: Yes;
well there was a split
where he was kicked
out of Green Peace.
>> LG: Why?
>> Mark Kitchell: For
breaching their ethic
of nonviolence was
the main reason.
There's a lot of politics
and the power succession,
what do you call it, a power
struggle or succession going
in within the movement
there too.
But, you know, after the whale
campaign they did the seal
campaigns, and that
was Paul's idea.
And the first year they came
under enormous pressure not
to interfere with the,
you know, sealers.
And Paul wanted to
spray paint the pelt
so that the seal comes --
>> LG: Weren't effective; right.
>> Mark Kitchell:
-- [overlapping].
>> LG: Right, right.
>> Mark Kitchell: And
they gave in on that.
And Paul came back the next
year just absolutely determined.
And, you know, he took a
sealers club and threw it
in the open water, and he
chained himself to the pelts.
And that's why they threw
him out, was they felt
that he'd gone too far.
But, you know, there was
a bigger split going on,
and Paul -- you know, Rex
Wyler in that clip he --
the next thing he talks
about is how it was
like an amoeba splitting.
And everybody went on and
grew and followed their paths
and it was in the
end much better.
And there are those
kinds of arguments
that will go on in a movement.
And in the end it's often
healthiest for people to split.
>> LG: It's interesting though,
kind of tracks how that happens
within a major movement
like this.
>> Mark Kitchell: Yes, yes.
>> LG: And to -- because
we're facing a major movement,
which you cover at the
end of this film here,
with global warming and with
our environmental issues.
So it's very helpful to
track what has happened,
what's been effective, how
the politics get involved.
And the challenges; I mean,
the politics are as fierce
as the movements
themselves, and the danger
that these people put
themselves in is enormous.
And it still is today.
They're threatened
every single day.
>> Mark Kitchell: Yes.
Sometimes it's not
fierce enough, Lisa.
Sometimes we do quicktivism
[phonetic], and write checks,
and don't get out there and put
our bodies between the harpoons.
>> LG: That's what I was
talking about with the petition,
going door to door
and standing -- yes.
>> Mark Kitchell: Oh, yes, yes.
>> LG: Now it's click to
petition -- click to vote, yes.
>> Mark Kitchell: Yes, yes.
>> LG: It's a little
more passive.
>> Mark Kitchell: And a lot
of these issues are
really hard to address.
You can't put your body
in front of something
and stop climate change.
>> LG: Right, exactly, exactly.
>> Mark Kitchell: Yes.
>> LG: Well, this next act
here talks about deforestation
and the stories that
you found here.
Now, I love the fact
that you made this more
than just a historical
documentary.
You brought in characters
here, stories,
because stories make
a difference.
Why did you choose to do that?
Was that intentional?
>> Mark Kitchell: Oh, sure,
that was my breathe
[phonetic], you know.
>> LG: The whole point.
>> Mark Kitchell: We learned
when we started making films
that character and story, right?
>> LG: Yes, yes, exactly.
>> Mark Kitchell: Follow
the rules of drama, right?
>> LG: Yes.
Well you did that.
Take a look at this.
>> And one of the things that
was keeping them from being able
to effectively defend the forest
against the chainsaw loggers
and the cattle ranchers was
not having an actual right
to this land.
They were seen as squatters.
>> The idea was raised there
should be rubber tapper
[phonetic] reserves
like Indian reserves.
The people wouldn't own the
land, but it would be theirs
for as long as they
wanted to work it.
It was an idea of the people who
actually lived in the forest.
That was a huge breakthrough
in concept.
This is a great movement
within Amazonia,
and that's what Shiku
[assumed spelling] started.
>> The rubber tappers decided
to establish the first reserve,
Gachoada [assumed spelling],
the old rubber plantation
where Shiku was born and
lived with family and friends.
However, the land had been
bought by a rancher named
"David E. Alves" [phonetic].
So the [inaudible] went to court
to claim their squatter rights.
It turned into a showdown.
>> Shepari [phonetic] ranchers
have always had trouble
with Sarangeros [phonetic]
blocking their deforestation.
Every time the ranchers tried
to deforest, they were blocked.
And Shepari it's stale male.
>> "We are in immediate danger.
We're seeing people killed,
and there could be many more."
>> The Parana [phonetic]
Ranch is terrorizing the whole
population of Shepari to
strike at me, Eker Mercindo
and Hymun Debajos, and
the whole directive
of our workers movement.
[ Speaking in Foreign Language ]
[ Music ]
>> The rubber tappers won.
Gachoada was declared the first
extracted reserve in the world.
It was an important victory
to the whole of the Amazon.
But the rancher, David Alves
had vowed to kill Shimku Mendes.
>> "This has not been
a bloodless journey.
Some have already fallen,
defending extracted reserves.
No one likes to die,
but if it has
to happen then it should
be to create more life.
Christ was crucified.
He gave his last drop of blood.
But since that day millions
of communities have been born
that believe in fight
for brotherhood.
[ Background Sounds ]
>> LG: So Chico, and the
wolf, and the whales,
they've all lost their
lives for a greater cause.
Did you -- this goes on to
talk more about this movement
and what started as a
result of Chico's death.
What happened?
>> Mark Kitchell: Yes, yes.
Well, he died for our sins, and
his death was the turning point.
And the Brazilian government
sort of saw that it had
to do something, and they
created this whole program
called "Nuestra Natura,"
"Our Nature," and they set
up 3 sets of reserves.
There were nature reserves,
there were indigenous reserves,
and there were resource reserves
like the rubber tappers.
And the one that we were talking
about in the film was
the first of them.
And altogether they saved
about a third of the Amazon,
and maybe as much as 40%
of the Brazilian Amazon
was set aside in reserves.
And, you know, Chico was clearly
the pivotal point in that.
But then there's always,
you know, flip the picture
and the Amazon is unraveling
because once you start
to put patches in
this intact forest,
the weather that comes
off the Atlantic, it rains
and evaporates 14 times on
its way across the Amazon.
And if you have patches, the
rain machine breaks down.
>> LG: Wow.
>> Mark Kitchell: And so --
>> LG: As statistics
in the film said
that in the next 100 years the
Amazon will look like a desert.
>> Mark Kitchell:
A semi-desert --
>> LG: A semi-desert.
>> Mark Kitchell: --
a thorn scrub, yes.
>> LG: A hundred years.
>> Mark Kitchell: Yes.
>> LG: Their children's
children's lifetime.
>> Mark Kitchell: Well,
maybe 4 generations,
but yes it's a short time span.
>> LG: [Inaudible], yes.
>> Mark Kitchell: Yes;
the greatest rainforest
on earth will be gone.
>> LG: That is devastating.
Now, what about reforestation,
are there measures being done,
the movements that Chico start
-- helping, are they helping?
>> Mark Kitchell:
Yes; in this country
and around the world I think
the last statistics I saw is
that reforestation
and conservation is
outpacing deforestation.
And, you know, that's
Mozambique and Madagascar,
that's the northeast of the
United States, that's --
>> LG: Are those genetically
modified trees, however?
>> Mark Kitchell: Yes;
often it's plantations.
It's not the full complex forest
that was there originally, but,
you know, people are trying --
there's a lot of restoration
work going on at the same time
that there's a lot
of destruction.
And, you know --
>> LG: They're not the
old growth that we're used
to with building-rebuilding
the forest floor and so forth.
>> Mark Kitchell: No.
>> LG: They're a different type
of tree, but it's being done.
>> Mark Kitchell: Yes; and there
are a lot of complex factors
like the forest of Los Angeles
were among the first to go
because of first pollution,
and then the bark --
western bark beetle.
>> LG: Right.
>> Mark Kitchell: And it's
just so many factors involved
in all this, you know; really
like the sorcerer's apprentice,
you know, little Mickey trying
to sweep back the
tide, you know.
You know, Bucky Fuller
talks about spaceship earth,
and the idea that we're
somehow supposed to guide it.
And that's easier
said than done.
But that's sort of the historic
project that we're trying
to do is find what -- we
have to guide this thing.
>> LG: One of the
most impactful moments
that I see people will speak
about is when they see the earth
from space, and it seems to
be a completely transformative
experience because you
really do look at it
like a spaceship earth.
>> Mark Kitchell: Yes, yes.
>> LG: Yes, yes.
>> Mark Kitchell: Yes, yes, yes.
>> LG: Absolutely you document
that in the film as well,
a few people talking
about that as well.
So in the movement that
Chico started, do you think
that there are different
movements like that
out there right now as we
speak, and why did you choose
to highlight these as opposed to
like the plastics organizations,
and the -- there's many, many --
I mean, 2 million
environmental organizations.
How do you choose which
ones to highlight?
>> Mark Kitchell: Well,
all we did was leave
things out, right, Lisa?
[Laughs] And that from beginning
to end, we were choosing what
to leave out and
what to focus on.
And, you know, I tried to
get as much in as I could.
And we started out doing a
6-part series until we realized
that that was too much the
audience would never --
>> LG: Oh, each part
could easily be --
>> Mark Kitchell: Yes, yes.
>> LG: -- hours and
hours long, of course.
>> Mark Kitchell:
Yes, yes, yes, yes.
>> LG: Yes.
>> Mark Kitchell: I
mean, on the level of --
act 4 is about global
resources using crises.
>> LG: Yes.
>> Mark Kitchell: And we
sketched [inaudible] and Kenya,
the Green Valley
Movement, which is one
of the great, great movements.
And before that in the '70s
ChipCo [phonetic] in India,
the tree-huggers, these women
who were, you know, went out
and hugged the trees to
stop them from being cut
down for cricket paths.
>> LG: And it worked.
>> Mark Kitchell: And it worked.
>> LG: And it did work, yes.
>> Mark Kitchell: And, you
know, India's still losing trees
in Himalayas for floods and
dams, and, you know, but,
you know, we had something
in there about Bolivia
and the fight to regain
control over their water,
which had been taken away, you
know, as part of a debt crisis.
And we had to cut that out.
And we just, you know.
>> LG: Wow, wow.
Well, let's take a look at
what is in the film right now.
This is the act 5, which
really addresses the mother
of all movements, which is
the climate change movement.
Let's take a look at this.
>> Disasters brought back
the issue of climate change.
Hurricane Katrina was a wakeup
call that revealed the impacts
of global warming in ways that
had not touched people before.
In Europe a heat
wave killed 70,000.
Drought and fire
turned Australia
and the American
Southwest into infernos;
arctic ice disappearing,
coral reefs bleaching.
Everything was happening faster
than scientists predicted.
>> I am technologically
optimistic
that we could prevent a lot
of dangerous outcomes,
not all, but many.
But I'm kind of politically
bleak that we're going to do it
until we have enough
tangle damage
that the [inaudible]
is able to tip us
over the political tipping
point of long-term action.
And we got close in '88,
maybe a little bit in Katrina,
and then we faded
away each time.
So I don't know, do we have to
have a hurricane take out Miami
and Shanghai to have
everybody wake up?
If that happens in 2025 by
then it's going to be too late
to prevent, you know,
melting of Greenland.
If it happened next year
it might be possible
to still do that.
But what a hell of a
way to run a planet.
>> You know, all the
poling data showing
that Americans understood
what was going on
and what the danger was,
but still nothing happening
in Washington, not a damn thing.
You know, we're 20 years
without any legislation
that would have done anything
to deal with the biggest problem
that the world's ever faced.
>> Our movement was
failing miserably
to create the movement,
the pressure the awareness
in the public to make
something happen.
[ Music ]
>> I started emailing people
to say we're going
to go for a walk.
We left from Robert Frost
old cabin because we liked
that most clichéd of all poems
about the road not taken.
>> And that emerged
into the global campaign
on climate action
for the Tick, Tick,
Tick Campaign as it's known.
>> Now we've moved on to do the
global version of this, 350.org,
in reference to Jim
Hansen's number,
this red line for the planet.
>> "350" refers to parts per
million of carbon dioxide
in the atmosphere, the number
considered safe by scientists.
It was surpassed in 1988,
the year Hansen first
issued his warning.
>> LG: In the movie you did talk
about the fact that there are
over 2 million environmental
organizations currently.
Do you think this is a
part of the solution,
or a part of the problem,
because they're not
all joined together.
>> Mark Kitchell: [Laughs] Well,
in some happy day we'll all be
together, but I think it's one
of the movement's strengths is
that there's so much diversity,
and there's a lot of
local and national
and international groups.
And I just think it's -- you
know, we talk a lot in the film
about bottom up movements
versus top down politics,
and I really think
you need both.
And you need the bottom to be
putting the pressure on the top.
And the movement is episodic,
and it needs fresh
bursts of energy.
And it needs people
to come along
when earlier groups have
sort of lost their way
and become ineffective.
I like to think about how
whenever the movement threatens
to become irrelevant, it's
the issues that bring it back.
>> LG: Yes; well that's --
>> Mark Kitchell: And
there's been that pattern.
>> LG: And that's why we
see -- I even asked --
I asked the question simply
because I think it's a new --
incredible thing that
there's 2 million movements
with that many people engaged
in this one issue that has to do
with us and our future.
Now, where have you
been showing the film?
I think this film would
be great if it's shown
in every educational
environment there is, schools,
those types of settings.
Where have you been
showing it up to this point?
>> Mark Kitchell: Well, it
premiered at Sundance a year
and a half ago, and in that
time we've done 50, 60,
70 festivals all over the world.
It's coming up this week
in Iceland, Malaysia,
and there's one other place that
I'm leaving out; forgive me.
We did a theatrical
release of about 40 cities.
And, you know, we launched
educational distribution,
and we zoomed past
$50,000 in business.
And we're just -- it's living up
to what I thought it would be,
which is sort of the documentary
of record that everybody's going
to use, and show, and teach
our children, and so on.
And I decided in May that
we just hadn't done justice
to a lot of places, and
that this film was really a
grassroots film, and we
needed to get out there
and do our own distribution.
And so we've been
organizing [inaudible].
And we got another
200 screenings coming
up in the next couple months.
I'm in LA to do 8 showings
in 9 days, and then I'm off
to the Northwest in November,
and we're going to
do the deep South.
We're going to really
go through there.
>> LG: Great.
I mean, it makes sense,
these movements were based
on grassroots movements.
Why not distribute the film
in the same way, in
the same pattern?
>> Mark Kitchell: Yes.
>> LG: Yes.
>> Mark Kitchell: And
it's really exciting to be
at this point where now it's
going to be available widely
to the public at large.
And that's where it
really should take off.
And all the work we've
been doing trying
to build it is really
supposed to pay off now.
>> LG: How do people get a
hold of the film, if they want
to show it in their
schools and so forth?
>> Mark Kitchell: Well,
it's -- as of October 1st,
it's available at all
your favorite platforms,
whether it's iTunes,
Amazon, Netflix,
Gaiam, just on, you know.
Name a platform, it
will be there for you.
>> LG: Great, great, terrific.
>> Mark Kitchell: Okay.
>> LG: All right, all right.
So let's take a look
at this ending,
which kind of puts
everything together in a way
that we can understand
and take action.
Take a look.
>> If we haven't learned yet,
then we should get it now,
that this is not
going to be top down.
It goes right back to hundreds
of millions of people on earth
who are trying to
find, and craft,
and create solutions
every single day.
>> The very word "movement"
I think is too small
to describe it.
No one started this world view,
no one is in charge of it,
there is no orthodoxy,
it is global, classless,
unquenchable, and tireless.
>> Going around the
country and other countries
as well I've encountered
nonprofit organizations
that I had never heard of.
But then that's when I thought,
"Well, gee, how many are there?"
And I started to count,
and I got to about 30,000
and I thought, "Okay,
this is big.
This is bigger than the
Catholic Church," you know.
[Laughs] There are literally too
many organizations in the world
that are working on these
issues of social justice
and the environment
because they're inseparable.
[ Music ]
It's growing, it's
growing, it's growing
because it's not a movement,
it's in a sense humanity's
immune response
to the dis-correlation
[phonetic] of the environment,
to the degradation
of an existence,
to the corruption we
see in economic systems,
and the pollution of
the industrial system.
[ Music ]
>> Over the course of 50 years
environmentalism has shifted
from saving wild places
to saving human society.
How we find a path
to a sustainable future
will involve reinventing,
not just the way we
make and do everything,
but reinventing the way we think
about our place in
the natural world.
John Muir's ecological insight
that everything is hitched
is not just true for nature,
but for humans as well.
[ Silence ]
>> There's no Hispanic air,
there's no African-American air,
there's no white -- there's air.
And if you breathe air, and most
people I know do breathe air,
then that makes you
part of the environment,
and if you're concerned about
that clean air, that air
and it being clean,
I would consider you
an environmentalist.
If you'd drink water, and most
people I know drink water,
and if you're concerned
about what's in the water,
I would consider you
an environmentalist.
And if you eat food, and
most people I know eat food,
and if you're concerned
about what's in the food,
I would consider you
and environmentalist.
If you answered 2 out of 3, I'd
say you're an environmentalist.
You just may not know it.
>> LG: So this answers
the question that I posed
in the beginning, "What
is an environmentalist?"
>> Mark Kitchell: Yes.
>> LG: And it's anyone who
eats, drinks, breathes, thinks.
[Laughs] Yes; you are an
environmentalist watching
this film.
What has your response
been to the film?
>> Mark Kitchell: Oh,
it's been fabulous.
Apart from a couple of bad
reviews in the New York Times
and the Chronicle, our hometown
paper, people are loving it.
People are getting it.
People are using it.
You know, they cry, and they get
it deeply, and they're grateful
for the education, and they
say over and over again
that I saw my whole
past, you know,
this is a lot of people's lives.
>> LG: Yes; and for the
youth it shows the history
of to where we are now.
It gives that movement --
it gives it momentum again.
>> Mark Kitchell: Yes; it gives
it history and meaning, yes.
>> LG: Yes, it does.
It does. So after it goes viral,
[laughs] what is the
next step for you?
>> Mark Kitchell: Well,
I'm going to resign come next
Earth Day when it's broadcast.
It's going on American Masters
on PBS next April 22nd, 2014.
And then I want to do
the follow-on film.
I want to do something like
the "Fierce Green Future."
The one thing that
we could not get
to was the present
and the future.
We just ran out of --
>> LG: Oh, yes.
>> Mark Kitchell:
-- runway and now --
>> LG: It's perfect though.
>> Mark Kitchell: -- we
couldn't make a big ending.
I had plans, and we
tried a few of them.
So I just figure I'll
make another film.
And it's really about
that larger vision
of civilizational
transformation.
I see this change is as big
as the Industrial Revolution.
And the next step it's the
sustainable revolution.
It's learning how to bring
our industrial society
into sustainable balance
for the natural world
on which we depend for survival.
And I think there's a lot
of solutions and a lot
of movements, and
a lot of things
that we really ought
to be looking at.
So I'm just going to take that
same framework and go future.
>> LG: I love it, "A
Fierce Green Future,"
that's very, very well said.
[Laughs]
>> Mark Kitchell: Yes.
>> LG: Thank you so much for
the film, for making the film,
for allowing Gaiam to be
a part of its distribution
and for really getting it
out there in a big way.
>> Mark Kitchell: Yes, yes, yes.
>> LG: Thank you so much.
>> Mark Kitchell: Okay.
>> LG: Mark Kitchell.
And if you'd like to watch
a replay of my interview
with Mark Kitchell, or share it
with your friends,
go to gaimatv.com.
And until then, I invite
you to stay inspired.
[ Music ]